\documentclass[12pt,notitlepage]{article}
\usepackage[bitstream-charter]{mathdesign}
\usepackage{inconsolata}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{microtype}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[utf8x]{inputenc}
\usepackage[letterpaper]{geometry}
\usepackage{titlesec}

\titleformat{\section}{\normalfont\large}{\thesection}{0.5em}{}
\titlespacing*{\section}{0em}{0.75em}{0.3em}

\begin{document}
\begingroup
  \centering
  {\Large Proposal: Concreteness Fading and Visual Programming in
  Teaching Object-Oriented Programming\\[1em]}

  Andy Jiang, Michael Mauer, and David Li\par
\endgroup

\section{Problem Definition}

Much effort has gone towards methods to teach programming as an
overall concept, with systems like Alice, Scratch, and CodeSpells
demonstrating how visual programming can successfully introduce
students to this field. Our goal is to teach the more specific topic
of object-oriented programming to novice programmers using these same
techniques, focusing on how to abstract and represent ideas such as
inheritance, polymorphism, and interfaces in such a framework.
Additionally, to reinforce these concepts to an audience already
somewhat familiar with programming, we will introduce concreteness
fading to the system, transitioning students from visual programming
to directly writing code. This will facilitate the learning of these
specific higher-level concepts and abstractions within computer
science, which is important to effectively educate and train the next
generation of computer science and software development students.

\section{Approach}

Our approach is to develop a game based on visual programming, where
the immediate objective is to manipulate various objects within a
world to accomplish certain goals. Tentatively, the main theme will be
controlling a robot to gather resources, build new robots (teaching
object instantiation, design patterns), writing code for new robots
(teaching inheritance, encapsulation, etc.), or terraforming the
environment. Students will control the robot and other objects via a
block-based visual programming interface akin to Scratch. However, one
novel idea is that the interface will be designed to express
object-oriented concepts, making clear ideas such as method
invocation, object instantiation, and polymorphism. Additionally, the
other novel idea is to use concreteness fading to demonstrate the link
between the abstracted representation and the underlying code: the
system will translate the visual representation to Java code, showing
its execution in tandem with the symbolic execution of the blocks and
the effect of the code in the world. The system will highlight the
visual block being executed, as well as the corresponding line of
code. Eventually, the system will fade the visual representation,
asking students to directly write more and more of the code itself.

Specifically, we intend to integrate various visual metaphors for
object-oriented concepts within the visual programming interface. For
example, class definitions would be represented as ``blueprints''
containing lists of methods, which students would drag into ``tell''
blocks that represent the message-passing style of OOP.\@ Students
would also add an object reference to the ``tell'' block, which the
system would translate into method invocation on the instance. Each
class would have an associated pictorial representation, which would
be attached to object reference blocks in the editor, and which would
also be used to represent instances of that object in the game world
grid. Later on, this representation could be faded by removing the
picture and/or morphing the tell block into the dot syntax used by
Java.

\begin{figure}[h]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{mockup.pdf}
  \caption{The main game interface.}
\end{figure}
The user interface has three main components: the world map, the
visual programmer and the interactive debugger. Normally, the student
will see only the programming and map interface. Once the student runs
their code, the debugger will appear, tracing the execution of the
Java code in tandem with the world map and code blocks. Here the
``blueprint'' metaphor shows the student what methods are available,
and the object instance they are controlling is highlighted on the
map. The \texttt{self} block (\texttt{this} in Java) is annotated with
the same picture as the blueprint and map.

\section{Evaluation}

We intend to test the system with a group of students in a class such
as CS 2110, Advanced Placement Computer Science, or similar class
involving Java and object-oriented principles. Students could be given
a pre- and post- test asking about various concepts from this paradigm.

\end{document}
